A certificate is used to guarantee trust between two parties during a transaction.

Understanding of TLS certificates:
Suppose a user is trying to access a server and this connection is not secured, the user types in his password and username,
the hacker is able to sniff this.

Now the user, decides to encrypt the message, although the hacker is unable to understand the message, so does the server
since both of them do not know how to decrypt it.

Next the user decide to add the key with the message, however the hacker also get the decrypting key too. Which in turn exposes the
message to the hacker. This is called Symmetric Encryption


Now the user decides to use two keys to encrypt the data, namely a private and public key. Only the private key can be use to unlock the public,
the public can be shared with others however, only those with private key can access the message unlocked in the public one, since the public key
is used only of encryption.


User generates private and public keys for ssh purposes

ssh-keygen

The public key will be sent to the server, so you can use your private key.

In case of this bank user, the server generates  both public and private key

openssl genrsa -out my-bank.key 1024 # this generates private key

openssl rsa -in my-bank.key -pubout > mybank.pem # this generates public key

Now when the user first connects to the server, its gets a public key in its browser, so does
the hacker. The user browser encrypts message using the public key provided by the server using something called asymmetry key.
This asymmetry and the public key is sent back, even if the hacker gets this key, he does not have the private key to decrypt the
message since it is only the private key that can do that, and it did not leave the server.

To be honest, after doing all this, the user is still not secure. If the hacker can find a way for you to route the traffic to his own
secured server. That is why certificates is needed to be sure that the public key sent is from who they said it is.

Your browser will be the one to verify the certificate, using the Certificate Authority

The server also needs a certificate from the user to be sure that the client is who he says he is.

All these are called PKI (public key infrastructure)

key is always in private key extension. While public key do not.

The certificates that servers use for verification are called server certificates

The certificates that CA use for verification are called root certificates

The certificates that clients use for verification are called client certificates

Since the client, and CA uses the same method.